---
layout: post
title: Code Kata - Roman Calculator
gh-repo: mirzafahad/codeKata_RomanCalculator
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [programming, practice]
comments: true
---
['Code Kata'](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kata_(programming)) is a programming exercise for programmers to hone their skills. The name, Kata, came from the Japanese concept of Kata in the martial Arts.

There are [21 different katas](http://codekata.com/) that you can practice. I was asked by an interviewer to solve [Roman Calculator Kata](http://bit.ly/1VfHqlj). Particularly, just the addition and the subtraction. This might sound easy if you are considering that you will convert the Roman numbers into integers, **add-sub** them and convert back. But the problem is if you are a Roman, you don't even know what is an integer. So the calculator that you are going to implement, must do the **addition-subtraction** the way the Romans did.

The procedures that Romans followed are explained in detail [here](http://turner.faculty.swau.edu/mathematics/materialslibrary/roman/) and [here](http://scienceblogs.com/goodmath/2006/08/16/roman-numerals-and-arithmetic/). My solution can be found [here](http://github.com/mirzafahad/codeKata_RomanCalculator), written in C.

Although it wasn't allowed to turn the roman number into integer, but I will have a function to do exactly that so that I can cross validate my result. This way I can convert any roman numbers to decimal or vice versa to test my actual Roman Calculator code. 

{: .box-note}
**Note:** Converting roman number into integer is a '[Project Euler Problem](http://projecteuler.net/)' ([Problem 89](http://projecteuler.net/problem=89)). The math behind the conversion is explained [here](http://www.mathsisfun.com/roman-numerals.html).


## Roman Converter

#### Roman-to-Decimal
My Roman Converter lib has two global functions, **roman2dec()** and **dec2roman()**. Roman to decimal converter was divided into two functions, **roman2dec\_char()** and  **roman2dec\_str()**. 
**roman2dec\_char** will take a single character and will return corresponding decimal value.


{% highlight javascript linenos %}
static uint16_t roman2dec_char(char romanChar)
{
	switch(toupper(romanChar))
	{
		case 'I': return 1;
		case 'V': return 5;
		case 'X': return 10;		
		case 'L': return 50;		
		case 'C': return 100;		
		case 'D': return 500;		
		case 'M': return 1000;	
		default	: return 0;
	}
}
{% endhighlight %}


If this function returns zero, then you can tell an invalid character was passed to the function, because there is no zero in roman number.

**roman2dec_str()** uses this function. All you have to do is add all the characters' corresponding decimal value. There is just one exception. The roman numbers are organized in a descending order from left to right. So, if you come across a smaller number before a larger number then you will have to subtract that smaller value from the larger value. So, I started to add the numbers from the right and kept track of the previous value for comparison.


#### Decimal-to-Roman

Converting a decimal number into a roman number is a bit complicated, because of the subtracting part. What you have to do is subtract the largest roman number from the decimal number until the decimal number gets less than that particular roman number, then switched to the next largest roman number that is less than the decimal number and so on until you reach zero.

I put all the possible roman numbers, including the subtract parts, in one array and their corresponding decimal value in another array.

{% highlight javascript linenos %}
static const int romanDecValue[] = {1000, 900, 500, 400, 100, 90, 50, 40, 10, 9, 5, 4, 1};
static const char *romanNumeral[] = {"M", "CM", "D", "CD", "C", "XC", "L", "XL", "X", "IX", "V", "IV", "I"};

{% endhighlight %}


#### Roman Calculator
The Roman Calculator library has two global functions, **add2romanNum** and  **sub2romanNum**. If you haven't visited the [algorithm links](http://turner.faculty.swau.edu/mathematics/materialslibrary/roman/) already, please do so. I will copy the example from that page:

##### Addition
Perform CCCLXIX + DCCCXLV.

1.Substitute for any subtractives: CCCLXVIIII + DCCCXXXXV 

<span style="color:red">['uncompactRoman' function]</span>


2.Catenate to obtain:CCCLXVIIIIDCCCXXXXV  

<span style="color:red">[Done by 'uncompactRoman' function]</span>


3.Sort to obtain:DCCCCCCLXXXXXVVIIII 

<span style="color:red">['bubble_sort_descending' function] </span>


4.Combine groups to obtain:

<span style="color:green">
DCCCCCCLXXXXXXIIII

DCCCCCCLLXIIII

DCCCCCCCXIIII

DDCCXIIII

MCCXIIII

</span>

<span style="color:red">['combineRomanNum' function]</span>

 
5.Substitute any subtractives to obtain:MCCXIV 

<span style="color:green">['compactRoman' function]</span>


### Notification

### Warning

{: .box-warning}
**Warning:** This is a warning box.

### Error

{: .box-error}
**Error:** This is an error box.